*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 4085 ***




The Adventures of Roderick Random

by Tobias Smollett


Contents

 THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE
 APOLOGUE
 CHAPTER I.
 CHAPTER II.
 CHAPTER III.
 CHAPTER IV.
 CHAPTER V.
 CHAPTER VI.
 CHAPTER VII.
 CHAPTER VIII.
 CHAPTER IX.
 CHAPTER X.
 CHAPTER XI.
 CHAPTER XII.
 CHAPTER XIII.
 CHAPTER XIV.
 CHAPTER XV.
 CHAPTER XVI.
 CHAPTER XVII.
 CHAPTER XVIII.
 CHAPTER XIX.
 CHAPTER XX.
 CHAPTER XXI.
 CHAPTER XXII.
 CHAPTER XXIII.
 CHAPTER XXIV.
 CHAPTER XXV.
 CHAPTER XXVI.
 CHAPTER XXVII.
 CHAPTER XXVIII.
 CHAPTER XXIX.
 CHAPTER XXX.
 CHAPTER XXXI.
 CHAPTER XXXII.
 CHAPTER XXXIII.
 CHAPTER XXXIV.
 CHAPTER XXXV.
 CHAPTER XXXVI.
 CHAPTER XXXVII.
 CHAPTER XXXVIII.
 CHAPTER XXXIX.
 CHAPTER XL.
 CHAPTER XLI.
 CHAPTER XLII.
 CHAPTER XLIII.
 CHAPTER XLIV.
 CHAPTER XLV.
 CHAPTER XLVI.
 CHAPTER XLVII.
 CHAPTER XLVIII.
 CHAPTER XLIX.
 CHAPTER L.
 CHAPTER LI.
 CHAPTER LII.
 CHAPTER LIII.
 CHAPTER LIV.
 CHAPTER LV.
 CHAPTER LVI.
 CHAPTER LVII.
 CHAPTER LVIII.
 CHAPTER LIX.
 CHAPTER LX.
 CHAPTER LXI.
 CHAPTER LXII.
 CHAPTER LXIII.
 CHAPTER LXIV.
 CHAPTER LXV.
 CHAPTER LXVI.
 CHAPTER LXVII.
 CHAPTER LXVIII.
 CHAPTER LXIX.




THE AUTHOR’S PREFACE


Of all kinds of satire, there is none so entertaining and universally
improving, as that which is introduced, as it were occasionally, in the
course of an interesting story, which brings every incident home to
life, and by representing familiar scenes in an uncommon and amusing
point of view, invests them with all the graces of novelty, while
nature is appealed to in every particular. The reader gratifies his
curiosity in pursuing the adventures of a person in whose favour he is
prepossessed; he espouses his cause, he sympathises with him in his
distress, his indignation is heated against the authors of his
calamity: the humane passions are inflamed; the contrast between
dejected virtue and insulting vice appears with greater aggravation,
and every impression having a double force on the imagination, the
memory retains the circumstance, and the heart improves by the example.
The attention is not tired with a bare catalogue of characters, but
agreeably diverted with all the variety of invention; and the
vicissitudes of life appear in their peculiar circumstances, opening an
ample field for wit and humour.

Romance, no doubt, owes its origin to ignorance, vanity, and
superstition. In the dark ages of the World, when a man had rendered
himself famous for wisdom or valour, his family and adherents availed
themselves of his superior qualities, magnified his virtues, and
represented his character and person as sacred and supernatural. The
vulgar easily swallowed the bait, implored his protection, and yielded
the tribute of homage and praise, even to adoration; his exploits were
handed down to posterity with a thousand exaggerations; they were
repeated as incitements to virtue; divine honours were paid, and altars
erected to his memory, for the encouragement of those who attempted to
imitate his example; and hence arose the heathen mythology, which is no
other than a collection of extravagant romances. As learning advanced,
and genius received cultivation, these stories were embellished with
the graces of poetry, that they might the better recommend themselves
to the attention; they were sung in public, at festivals, for the
instruction and delight of the audience; and rehearsed before battle,
as incentives to deeds of glory. Thus tragedy and the epic muse were
born, and, in the progress of taste, arrived at perfection. It is no
wonder that the ancients could not relish a fable in prose, after they
had seen so many remarkable events celebrated in verse by their best
poets; we therefore find no romance among them during the era of their
excellence, unless the _Cyropædia_ of Xenophon may be so called; and it
was not till arts and sciences began to revive after the irruption of
the barbarians into Europe, that anything of this kind appeared. But
when the minds of men were debauched by the imposition of priestcraft
to the most absurd pitch of credulity, the authors of romance arose,
and losing sight of probability, filled their performances with the
most monstrous hyperboles. If they could not equal the ancient poets in
point of genius they were resolved to excel them in fiction, and apply
to the wonder, rather than the judgment, of their readers. Accordingly,
they brought necromancy to their aid, and instead of supporting the
character of their heroes by dignity of sentiment and practice,
distinguished them by their bodily strength, activity, and extravagance
of behaviour. Although nothing could be more ludicrous and unnatural
than the figures they drew, they did not want patrons and admirers; and
the world actually began to be infected with the spirit of
knight-errantry, when Cervantes, by an inimitable piece of ridicule,
reformed the taste of mankind, representing chivalry in the right point
of view, and converting romance to purposes far more useful and
entertaining, by making it assume the sock, and point out the follies
of ordinary life.

The same method has been practised by other Spanish and French authors,
and by none more successfully than by Monsieur Le Sage, who, in his
_Adventures of Gil Blas_, has described the knavery and foibles of
life, with infinite humour and sagacity. The following sheets I have
modelled on his plan, taking me liberty, however, to differ from him in
the execution, where I thought his particular situations were uncommon,
extravagant, or peculiar to the country in which the scene is laid. The
disgraces of Gil Blas are, for the most part, such as rather excite
mirth than compassion; he himself laughs at them; and his transitions
from distress to happiness, or at least ease, are so sudden, that
neither the reader has time to pity him, nor himself to be acquainted
with affliction. This conduct, in my opinion, not only deviates from
probability, but prevents that generous indignation, which ought to
animate the reader against the sordid and vicious disposition of the
world. I have attempted to represent modest merit struggling with every
difficulty to which a friendless orphan is exposed, from his own want
of experience, as well as from the selfishness, envy, malice, and base
indifference of mankind. To secure a favourable prepossession, I have
allowed him the advantages of birth and education, which in the series
of his misfortunes will, I hope, engage the ingenuous more warmly in
his behalf; and though I foresee, that some people will be offended at
the mean scenes in which he is involved, I persuade myself that the
judicious will not only perceive the necessity of describing those
situations to which he must of course be confined, in his low estate,
but also find entertainment in viewing those parts of life, where the
humours and passions are undisguised by affectation, ceremony, or
education; and the whimsical peculiarities of disposition appear as
nature has implanted them. But I believe I need not trouble myself in
vindicating a practice authorized by the best writers in this way, some
of whom I have already named.

Every intelligent reader will, at first sight, perceive I have not
deviated from nature in the facts, which are all true in the main,
although the circumstances are altered and disguised, to avoid personal
satire.

It now remains to give my reasons for making the chief personage of
this work a North Briton, which are chiefly these: I could, at a small
expense, bestow on him such education as I thought the dignity of his
birth and character required, which could not possibly be obtained in
England, by such slender means as the nature of my plan would afford.
In the next place, I could represent simplicity of manners in a remote
part of the kingdom, with more propriety than in any place near the
capital; and lastly, the disposition of the Scots, addicted to
travelling, justifies my conduct in deriving an adventurer from that
country. That the delicate reader may not be offended at the unmeaning
oaths which proceed from the mouths of some persons in these memoirs, I
beg leave to promise, that I imagined nothing could more effectually
expose the absurdity of such miserable expletives, than a natural and
verbal representation of the discourse in which they occur.




APOLOGUE


A young painter, indulging a vein of pleasantry, sketched a kind of
conversation piece, representing a bear, an owl, a monkey, and an ass;
and to render it more striking, humorous, and moral, distinguished
every figure by some emblem of human life. Bruin was exhibited in the
garb and attitude of an old, toothless, drunken soldier; the owl
perched upon the handle of a coffee-pot, with spectacle on nose, seemed
to contemplate a newspaper; and the ass, ornamented with a huge tie-wig
(which, however, could not conceal his long ears), sat for his picture
to the monkey, who appeared with the implements of painting. This
whimsical group afforded some mirth, and met with general approbation,
until some mischievous wag hinted that the whole—was a lampoon upon the
friends of the performer; an insinuation which was no sooner circulated
than those very people who applauded it before began to be alarmed, and
even to fancy themselves signified by the several figures of the piece.

Among others, a worthy personage in years, who had served in the army
with reputation, being incensed at the supposed outrage, repaired to
the lodging of the painter, and finding him at home, “Hark ye, Mr.
Monkey,” said he, “I have a good mind to convince you, that though the
bear has lost his teeth, he retains his paws, and that he is not so
drunk but he can perceive your impertinence.” “Sblood! sir, that
toothless jaw is a d—ned scandalous libel—but don’t you imagine me so
chopfallen as not to be able to chew the cud of resentment.” Here he
was interrupted by the arrival of a learned physician, who, advancing
to the culprit with fury in his aspect, exclaimed, “Suppose the
augmentation of the ass’s ears should prove the diminution of the
baboon’s—nay, seek not to prevaricate, for, by the beard of
Aesculapius! there is not one hair in this periwig that will not stand
up in judgment to convict thee of personal abuse. Do but observe,
captain, how this pitiful little fellow has copied the very curls—the
colour, indeed, is different, but then the form and foretop are quite
similar.” While he thus remonstrated in a strain of vociferation, a
venerable senator entered, and waddling up to the delinquent,
“Jackanapes!” cried he, “I will now let thee see I can read something
else than a newspaper, and that without the help of spectacles: here is
your own note of hand, sirrah, for money, which if I had not advanced,
you yourself would have resembled an owl, in not daring to show your
face by day, you ungrateful slanderous knave!”

In vain the astonished painter declared that he had no intention to
give offence, or to characterise particular persons: they affirmed the
resemblance was too palpable to be overlooked; they taxed him with
insolence, malice, and ingratitude; and their clamours being overheard
by the public, the captain was a bear, the doctor an ass, and the
senator an owl, to his dying day.

Christian reader, I beseech thee, in the bowels of the Lord, remember
this example “while thou art employed in the perusal of the following
sheets; and seek not to appropriate to thyself that which equally
belongs to five hundred different people. If thou shouldst meet with a
character that reflects thee in some ungracious particular, keep thy
own counsel; consider that one feature makes not a face, and that
though thou art, perhaps, distinguished by a bottle nose, twenty of thy
neighbours may be in the same predicament.”




THE ADVENTURES OF RODERICK RANDOM




CHAPTER I


Of my Birth and Parentage


I was born in the northern part of this united kingdom, in the house of
my grandfather, a gentleman of considerable fortune and influence, who
had on many occasions signalised himself in behalf of his country; and
was remarkable for his abilities in the law, which he exercised with
great success in the station of a judge, particularly against beggars,
for whom he had a singular aversion.

My father (his youngest son) falling in love with a poor relation, who
lived with the old gentleman in quality of a housekeeper, espoused her
privately; and I was the first fruit of that marriage. During her
pregnancy, a dream discomposed my mother so much that her husband,
tired with her importunity, at last consulted a highland seer, whose
favourable interpretation he would have secured beforehand by a bribe,
but found him incorruptible. She dreamed she was delivered of a
tennis-ball, which the devil (who, to her great surprise, acted the
part of a midwife) struck so forcibly with a racket that it disappeared
in an instant; and she was for some time inconsolable for the lost of
her offspring; when, all on a sudden, she beheld it return with equal
violence, and enter the earth, beneath her feet, whence immediately
sprang up a goodly tree covered with blossoms, the scent of which
operated so strongly on her nerves that she awoke. The attentive sage,
after some deliberation, assured my parents, that their firstborn would
be a great traveller; that he would undergo many dangers and
difficulties, and at last return to his native land, where he would
flourish in happiness and reputation. How truly this was foretold will
appear in the sequel. It was not long before some officious person
informed my grandfather of certain familiarities that passed between
his son and housekeeper which alarmed him so much that, a few days
after, he told my father it was high time for him to think of settling;
and that he had provided a match for him, to which he could in justice
have no objections. My father, finding it would be impossible to
conceal his situation much longer, frankly owned what he had done; and
excused himself for not having asked the consent of his father, by
saying, he knew it would have been to no purpose; and that, had his
inclination been known, my grandfather might have taken such measures
as would have effectually put the gratification of it out of his power:
he added, that no exceptions could be taken to his wife’s virtue,
birth, beauty, and good sense, and as for fortune, it was beneath his
care. The old gentleman, who kept all his passions, except one, in
excellent order, heard him to an end with great temper, and then calmly
asked, how he proposed to maintain himself and spouse? He replied, he
could be in no danger of wanting while his father’s tenderness
remained, which he and his wife should always cultivate with the utmost
veneration; and he was persuaded his allowance would be suitable to the
dignity and circumstances of his family, and to the provision already
made for his brothers and sisters, who were happily settled under his
protection. “Your brothers and sisters,” said my grandfather, “did not
think it beneath them to consult me in an affair of such importance as
matrimony; neither, I suppose, would you have omitted that piece of
duty, had you not some secret fund in reserve; to the comforts of which
I leave you, with a desire that you will this night seek out another
habitation for yourself and wife, whither, in a short time, I will send
you an account of the expense I have been at in your education, with a
view of being reimbursed. Sir, you have made the grand tour—you are a
polite gentleman—a very pretty gentleman—I wish you a great deal of
joy, and am your very humble servant.”

So saying, he left my father in a situation easily imagined. However,
he did not long hesitate; for, being perfectly well acquainted with his
father’s disposition, he did not doubt that he was glad of this
pretence to get rid of him; and his resolves being as invariable as the
laws of the Medes and Persians, he knew it would be to no purpose to
attempt him by prayers and entreaties; so without any farther
application, he betook himself, with his disconsolate bedfellow to a
farm-house, where an old servant of his mother dwelt: there they
remained some time in a situation but ill adapted to the elegance of
their desires and tenderness of their love; which nevertheless my
father chose to endure, rather than supplicate an unnatural and
inflexible parent but my mother, foreseeing the inconveniences to which
she must have been exposed, had she been delivered in this place (and
her pregnancy was very far advanced), without communicating her design
to her husband, went in disguise to the house of my grandfather, hoping
that her tears and condition would move him to compassion, and
reconcile him to an event which was now irrecoverably past.

She found means to deceive the servants, and get introduced as an
unfortunate lady, who wanted to complain of some matrimonial
grievances, it being my grandfather’s particular province to decide in
all cases of scandal. She was accordingly admitted into his presence,
where, discovering herself, she fell at his feet, and in the most
affecting manner implored his forgiveness; at the same time
representing the danger that threatened not only her life, but that of
his own grandchild, which was about to see the light. He told her he
was sorry that the indiscretion of her and his son had compelled him to
make a vow, which put it out of his power to give them any assistance;
that he had already imparted his thoughts on that subject to her
husband, and was surprised that they should disturb his peace with any
farther importunity. This said, he retired.

The violence of my mother’s affliction had such an effect on her
constitution that she was immediately seized with the pains of
childbed; and had not an old maidservant, to whom she was very dear,
afforded her pity and assistance, at the hazard of incurring my
grandfather’s displeasure, she and the innocent fruit of her womb must
have fallen miserable victims to his rigour and inhumanity. By the
friendship of this poor woman she was carried up to a garret, and
immediately delivered of a man child, the story of whose unfortunate
birth he himself now relates. My father, being informed of what had
happened, flew to the embraces of his darling spouse, and while he
loaded his offspring with paternal embraces, could not forbear shedding
a flood of tears on beholding the dear partner of his heart (for whose
ease he would have sacrificed the treasures of the east) stretched upon
a flock bed, in a miserable apartment, unable to protect her from the
inclemencies of the weather. It is not to be supposed that the old
gentleman was ignorant of what passed, though he affected to know
nothing of the matter, and pretended to be very much surprised, when
one of his grandchildren, by his eldest son deceased, who lived with
him as his heir apparent, acquainted him with the affair; he determined
therefore to observe no medium, but immediately (on the third day after
her delivery) sent her a peremptory order to be gone, and turned off
the servant who had preserved her life. This behaviour so exasperated
my father that he had recourse to the most dreadful imprecations; and
on his bare knees implored that Heaven would renounce him if ever he
should forget or forgive the barbarity of his sire.

The injuries which this unhappy mother received from her removal in
such circumstances, and the want of necessaries where she lodged,
together with her grief and anxiety of mind, soon threw her into a
languishing disorder, which put an end to her life. My father, who
loved her tenderly, was so affected with her death that he remained six
weeks deprived of his senses; during which time, the people where he
lodged carried the infant to the old man who relented so far, on
hearing the melancholy story of his daughter-in-law’s death, and the
deplorable condition of his son, as to send the child to nurse, and he
ordered my father to be carried home to his house, where he soon
recovered the use of his reason.

Whether this hardhearted judge felt any remorse for his cruel treatment
of his son and daughter, or (which is more probable) was afraid his
character would suffer in the neighbourhood, he professed great sorrow
for his conduct to my father, whose delirium was succeeded by a
profound melancholy and reserve. At length he disappeared, and,
notwithstanding all imaginable inquiry, could not be heard of; a
circumstance which confirmed most people in the opinion of his having
made away with himself in a fit of despair. How I understood the
particulars of my birth will appear in the course of these memoirs.




CHAPTER II


I grow up—am hated by my Relations—sent to School—neglected by my
Grandfather—maltreated by my Master—seasoned to Adversity—I form Cabals
against the Pedant—am debarred Access to my Grandfather—hunted by his
Heir—I demolish the Teeth of his Tutor


There were not wanting some who suspected my uncles of being concerned
in my father’s fate, on the supposition that they would all share in
the patrimony destined for him; and this conjecture was strengthened by
reflecting that in all his calamities they never discovered the least
inclination to serve him; but, on the contrary, by all the artifices in
their power, fed his resentment and supported his resolution of leaving
him to misery and want. But people of judgment treated this insinuation
as an idle chimera; because, had my relations been so wicked as to
consult their interest by committing such an atrocious crime, the fate
of my father would have extended to me too whose life was another
obstacle to their expectation. Meanwhile, I grew apace, and as I
strongly resembled my father, who was the darling of the tenants, I
wanted nothing which their indigent circumstances could afford: but
their favour was a weak resource against the jealous enmity of my
cousins; who the more my infancy promised, conceived the more
implacable hatred against me: and before I was six years of age, had so
effectually blockaded my grandfather that I never saw him but by
stealth, when I sometimes made up to his chair as he sat to view his
labourers in the field: on which occasion he would stroke my head, bid
me be a good boy, and promise to take care of me.

I was soon after sent to school at a village hard by, of which he had
been dictator time out of mind; but as he never paid for my board, nor
supplied me with clothes, books, and other necessaries I required, my
condition was very ragged and contemptible, and the schoolmaster, who,
through fear of my grandfather, taught me gratis, gave himself no
concern about the progress I made under his instruction. In spite of
all these difficulties and disgraces, I became a good proficient in the
Latin tongue; and, as soon as I could write tolerably, pestered my
grandfather with letters to such a degree that he sent for my master,
and chid him severely for bestowing such pains on my education, telling
him that, if ever I should be brought to the gallows for forgery, which
he had taught me to commit, my blood would lie on his head.

The pedant, who dreaded nothing more than the displeasure of his
patron, assured his honour that the boy’s ability was more owing to his
own genius and application than to any instruction or encouragement he
received; that, although he could not divest him of the knowledge he
had already imbibed, unless he would empower him to disable his
fingers, he should endeavour, with God’s help, to prevent his future
improvement. And, indeed, he punctually performed what he had
undertaken; for, on pretence that I had written impertinent letters to
my grandfather, he caused a board to be made with five holes in it,
through which he thrust the fingers and thumb of my right hand, and
fastened it by whipcord to my wrist, in such a manner as effectually
debarred me the use of my pen. But this restraint I was freed from in a
few days, by an accident which happened in a quarrel between me and
another boy; who, taking upon him to insult my poverty, I was so
incensed at his ungenerous reproach that with one stroke with my
machine I cut him to the skull, to the great terror of myself and
schoolfellows, who left him bleeding on the ground, and ran to inform
the master of what had happened. I was so severely punished for this
trespass that, were I to live to the age of Methusalem, the impression
it made on me would not be effaced; the more than the antipathy and
horror I conceived for the merciless tyrant who inflicted it. The
contempt which my appearance naturally produced in all who saw me, the
continual wants to which I was exposed, and my own haughty disposition,
impatient of affronts, involved me in a thousand troublesome
adventures, by which I was at length inured in adversity, and
emboldened to undertakings far above my years. I was often inhumanly
scourged for crimes I did not commit, because, having the character of
a vagabond in the village, every piece of mischief, whose author lay
unknown, was charged upon me. I have been found guilty of robbing
orchards I never entered, of killing cats I never hunted, of stealing
gingerbread I never touched, and of abusing old women I never saw. Nay,
a stammering carpenter had eloquence enough to persuade my master that
I fired a pistol loaded with small shot into his window; though my
landlady and the whole family bore witness that I was abed fast asleep
at the time when this outrage was committed. I was once flogged for
having narrowly escaped drowning, by the sinking of a ferry boat in
which I was passenger. Another time, for having recovered of a bruise
occasioned by a horse and cart running over me. A third time, for being
bitten by a baker’s dog. In short, whether I was guilty or unfortunate,
the correction and sympathy of this arbitrary pedagogue were the same.

Far from being subdued by this informal usage, my indignation triumphed
over that slavish awe which had hitherto enforced my obedience; and the
more my years and knowledge increased, the more I perceived the
injustice and barbarity of his behaviour. By the help of an uncommon
genius, and the advice and direction of our usher, who had served my
father in his travels, I made a surprising progress in the classics,
writing, and arithmetic; so that, before I was twelve years old, I was
allowed by everybody to be the best scholar in the school. This
qualification, together with the boldness of temper and strength of
make which had subjected almost all my contemporaries, gave me such
influence over them that I began to form cabals against my persecutor;
and was in hope of being able to bid him defiance in a very short
time. Being at the head of a faction, consisting of thirty boys, most
of them of my own age, I was determined to put their mettle to trial,
that I might know how far they were to be depended upon, before I put
my grand scheme in execution: with this view, we attacked a body of
stout apprentices, who had taken possession of a part of the ground
allotted to us for the scheme of our diversions, and who were then
playing at ninepins on the spot; but I had the mortification to see my
adherents routed in an instant, and a leg of one of them broke in his
flight by the bowl, which one of our adversaries had detached in
pursuit of us. This discomfiture did not hinder us from engaging them
afterwards in frequent skirmishes, which we maintained by throwing
stones at a distance, wherein I received many wounds, the scars of
which still remain. Our enemies were so harassed and interrupted by
these alarms that they at last abandoned their conquest, and left us to
the peaceable enjoyment of our own territories.

It would be endless to enumerate the exploits we performed in the
course of this confederacy, which became the terror of the whole
village; insomuch that, when different interests divided it, one of the
parties commonly courted the assistance of Roderick Random (by which
name I was known) to cast the balance, and keep the opposite faction in
awe. Meanwhile, I took the advantage of every play-day to present
myself before my grandfather, to whom I seldom found access, by reason
of his being closely besieged by a numerous family of his female
grandchildren, who, though they perpetually quarrelled among
themselves, never failed to join against me, as the common enemy of
all. His heir, who was about the age of eighteen, minded nothing but
fox-hunting, and indeed was qualified for nothing else, notwithstanding
his grandfather’s indulgence in entertaining a tutor for him at home;
who at the same time performed the office of parish clerk. This young
Actaeon, who inherited his grandfather’s antipathy to everything in
distress, never sat eyes on me without uncoupling his beagles, and
hunting me into some cottage or other, whither I generally fled for
shelter. In this Christian amusement he was encouraged by his
preceptor, who, no doubt, took such opportunities to ingratiate himself
with the rising sun, observing, that the old gentleman, according to
the course of nature, had not long to live, for he was already on the
verge of fourscore.

The behaviour of this rascally sycophant incensed me so much, that one
day, when I was beleaguered by him and his hounds in a farmer’s house,
where I had found protection, I took aim at him (being an excellent
marksman) with a large pebble, which struck out four of his foreteeth,
and effectually incapacitated him from doing the office of a clerk.




CHAPTER III


My Mother’s Brother arrives—relieves me—a Description of him—he goes
along with me to the House of my Grandfather—is encountered by his
Dogs—defeats them, after a bloody Engagement—is admitted to the old
Gentleman—a Dialogue between them


About this time my mother’s only brother, who had been long abroad,
lieutenant of a man-of-war, arrived in his own country; where being
informed of my condition, he came to see me, and out of his slender
finances not only supplied me with what necessaries I wanted for the
present, but resolved not to leave the country until he had prevailed
on my grandfather to settle something handsome for the future. This was
a task to which he was by no means equal, being entirely ignorant, not
only of the judge’s disposition, but also of the ways of men in
general, to which his education on board had kept him an utter
stranger.

He was a strong built man, somewhat bandy legged, with a neck like that
of a bull, and a face which (you might easily perceive) had withstood
the most obstinate assaults of the weather. His dress consisted of a
soldier’s coat altered for him by the ship’s tailor, a striped flannel
jacket, a pair of red breeches spanned with pitch, clean gray worsted
stockings, large silver buckles that covered three-fourths of his
shoes, a silver-laced hat, whose crown overlooked the brims about an
inch and a half, black bobwig in buckle, a check shirt, a silk
handkerchief, a hanger, with a brass handle, girded to his thigh by a
furnished lace belt, and a good oak plant under his arm. Thus equipped,
he set out with me (who by his bounty made a very decent appearance)
for my grandfather’s house, where we were saluted by Jowler and Caesar,
whom my cousin, young master, had let loose at our approach. Being well
acquainted with the inveteracy of these curs, I was about to betake
myself to my heels, when my uncle seized me with one hand, brandished
his cudgel with the other, and at one blow laid Caesar sprawling on the
ground; but, finding himself attacked at the same time in the rear by
Jowler, and fearing Caesar might recover, he drew his hanger, wheeled
about, and by a lucky stroke severed Jowler’s head from his body. By
this time, the young foxhunter and three servants, armed with
pitchforks and flails, were come to the assistance of the dogs, whom
they found breathless upon the field; and my cousin was so provoked at
the death of his favourites, that he ordered his attendants to advance,
and take vengeance on their executioner, whom he loaded with all the
curses and reproaches his anger could suggest. Upon which my uncle
stepped forwards with an undaunted air, at the sight of whose bloody
weapons his antagonists fell back with precipitation, when he accosted
their leader thus:

“Lookee, brother, your dogs having boarded me without provocation, what
I did was in my own defence. So you had best be civil, and let us shoot
a head, clear of you.”

Whether the young squire misinterpreted my uncle’s desire of peace, or
was enraged at the fate of his hounds beyond his usual pitch of
resolution, I know not; but he snatched a flail from one of his
followers, and came up with a show of assaulting the lieutenant, who,
putting himself in a posture of defence, proceeded thus: “Lookee, you
lubberly son of a w—e, if you come athwart me, ’ware your gingerbread
work. I’ll be foul of your quarter, d—n me.”

This declaration, followed by a flourish of his hanger, seemed to check
the progress of the young gentleman’s choler, who, looking behind him,
perceived his attendants had slunk into the house, shut the gate, and
left him to decide the contention by himself.

Here a parley ensued, which was introduced by my cousin’s asking, “Who
the devil are you? What do you want? Some scoundrel of a seaman, I
suppose, who has deserted and turned thief. But don’t think you shall
escape, sirrah—I’ll have you hang’d, you dog, I will. Your blood shall
pay for that of my two hounds, you ragamuffin. I would not have parted
with them to save your whole generation from the gallows, you ruffian,
you!” “None of your jaw, you swab—none of your jaw,” replied my uncle,
“else I shall trim your laced jacket for you. I shall rub you down with
an oaken towel, my boy, I shall.” So saying, he sheathed his hanger,
and grasped his cudgel. Meanwhile the people of the house being
alarmed, one of my female cousins opened a window, and asked what was
the matter. “The matter!” answered the lieutenant; “no great matter,
young woman; I have business with the old gentleman, and this spark,
belike, won’t allow me to come alongside of him,” that’s all. After a
few minutes pause we were admitted, and conducted to my grandfather’s
chamber through a lane of my relations, who honoured me with very
significant looks as I passed along. When we came into the judge’s
presence my uncle, after two or three sea-bows, expressed himself in
this manner; “Your servant, your servant. What cheer, father? what
cheer? I suppose you don’t know me—mayhap you don’t. My name is Tom
Bowling, and this here boy, you look as if you did not know him
neither; ’tis like you mayn’t. He’s new rigged, i’faith; his cloth
don’t shake in the wind so much as it wont to do. ’Tis my nephew, d’y
see, Roderick Random—your own flesh and blood, old gentleman. Don’t lay
a-stern, you dog,” pulling me forward. My grandfather (who was laid up
with the gout) received this relation, after his long absence, with
that coldness of civility which was peculiar to him; told him he was
glad to see him, and desired him to sit down. “Thank ye, thank ye, sir,
I had as lief stand,” said my uncle; “for my own part, I desire nothing
of you; but, if you have any conscience at all, do something for this
poor boy, who has been used at a very unchristian rate. Unchristian do
I call it? I am sure the Moors in Barbary have more humanity than to
leave their little ones to want. I would fain know why my sister’s son
is more neglected than that there fair-weather Jack” (pointing to the
young squire, who with the rest of my cousins had followed us into the
room). “Is not he as near akin to you as the other? Is he not much
handsomer and better built than that great chucklehead? Come, come,
consider, old gentleman, you are going in a short time to give an
account of your evil actions. Remember the wrongs you did his father,
and make all the satisfaction in your power before it be too late. The
least thing you can do is to settle his father’s portion on him.”

The young ladies, who thought themselves too much concerned to contain
themselves any longer, set up their throats all together against my
protector—“Scurvy companion—saucy tarpaulin—rude, impertinent fellow,
did he think to prescribe to grandpapa? His sister’s brat had been too
well taken care of. Grandpapa was too just not make a difference
between an unnatural, rebellious son and his dutiful, loving children,
who took his advice in all things;” and such expressions were vented
against him with great violence; until the judge at length commanded
silence. He calmly rebuked my uncle for his unmannerly behaviour, which
he said he would excuse on account of his education: he told him he had
been very kind to the boy, whom he had kept at school seven or eight
years, although he was informed he made no progress in his learning but
was addicted to all manner of vice, which he rather believed, because
he himself was witness to a barbarous piece of mischief he had
committed on the jaws of his chaplain. But, however, he would see what
the lad was fit for, and bind him apprentice to some honest tradesman
or other, provided he would mend his manners, and behave for the future
as became him.

The honest tar (whose pride and indignation boiled within him) answered
my grandfather, that it was true he had sent him to school, but it had
cost him nothing, for he had never been at one shilling expense to
furnish him with food, raiment, books, or other necessaries; so that it
was not much to be wondered at, if the boy made small progress; and yet
whoever told him so was a lying, lubberly rascal, and deserved to be
keel-haul’d; for though he (the lieutenant) did not understand those
matters himself, he was well informed as how Rory was the best scholar
of his age in all the country; the truth of which he would maintain, by
laying a wager of his whole half-year’s pay on the boy’s head—with
these words he pulled out his purse, and challenged the company:
“Neither is he predicted to vice, as you affirm, but rather, left like
a wreck, d’ye see, at the mercy of the wind and weather, by your
neglect, old gentleman. As for what happened to your chaplain, I am
only sorry that he did not knock out the scoundrel’s brains instead of
his teeth. By the Lord, if ever I come up with him, he had better be in
Greenland, that’s all. Thank you for your courteous offer of binding
the lad apprentice to a tradesman. I suppose you would make a tailor of
him—would you? I had rather see him hang’d, d’ye see. Come along, Rory,
I perceive how the land lies, my boy—let’s tack about, i’faith—while I
have a shilling you shan’t want a tester. B’we, old gentleman; you’re
bound for the other world, but I believe damnably ill-provided for the
voyage.” Thus ended our visit; and we returned to the village, my uncle
muttering curses all the way against the old shark and the young fry
that surrounded him.




CHAPTER IV


My Grandfather makes his Will—our second Visit—he Dies—his Will is read
in Presence of all his living Descendants—the Disappointment of my
female Cousins—my Uncle’s Behaviour


A few weeks after our first visit, we were informed that the old judge,
at the end of a fit of thoughtfulness, which lasted three days, had
sent for a notary and made his will; that the distemper had mounted
from his legs to his stomach, and, being conscious of his approaching
end, he had desired to see all his descendants without exception. In
obedience to this summons, my uncle set out with me a second time, to
receive the last benediction of my grandfather: often repeating by the
road, “Ey, ey, we have brought up the old hulk at last. You shall
see—you shall see the effect of my admonition,” When we entered his
chamber, which was crowded with his relations, we advanced to the
bedside, where we found him in his last agonies, supported by two of
his granddaughters, who sat on each side of him, sobbing most
piteously, and wiping away the froth and slaver as it gathered on his
lips, which they frequently kissed with a show of great anguish and
affection. My uncle approached him with these words, “What! he’s not
a-weigh. How fare ye? how fare ye, old gentleman? Lord have mercy upon
your poor sinful soul!” Upon which, the dying man turned his languid
eyes towards us, and Mr. Bowling went on—“Here’s poor Roy come to see
you before you die, and to receive your blessing. What, man! don’t
despair, you have been a great sinner, ’tis true,—what then? There’s a
righteous judge above, an’t there? He minds me no more than a porpoise.
Yes, yes, he’s a-going; the land crabs will have him, I see that! his
anchor’s a-peak, i’faith.” This homely consolation scandalised the
company so much, and especially the parson, who probably thought his
province invaded, that we were obliged to retire into another room,
where, in a few minutes, we were convinced of my grandfather’s decease,
by a dismal yell uttered by the young ladies in his apartment; whither
we immediately hastened, and found his heir, who had retired a little
before into a closet, under pretence of giving vent to his sorrow,
asking, with a countenance beslubbered with tears, if his grandpapa was
certainly dead? “Dead!” (says my uncle, looking, at the body) “ay, ay,
I’ll warrant him as dead as a herring. Odd’s fish! now my dream is out
for all the world. I thought I stood upon the forecastle, and saw a
parcel of carrion crows foul of a dead shark: that floated alongside,
and the devil perching upon our spritsail yard, in the likeness of a
blue bear—who, d’ye see jumped overboard upon the carcass and carried
it to the bottom in his claws.” “Out upon thee, reprobate” cries the
parson “out upon thee, blasphemous wretch! Dost thou think his honour’s
soul is in the possession of Satan?” The clamour immediately arose, and
my poor uncle, being, shouldered from one corner of the room to the
other, was obliged to lug out in his own defence, and swear he would
turn out for no man, till such time as he knew who had the title to
send him adrift. “None of your tricks upon travellers,” said he;
“mayhap old Bluff has left my kinsman here his heir: if he has, it will
be the better for his miserable soul. Odds bob! I’d desire no better
news. I’d soon make him a clear shin, I warrant you.” To avoid any
further disturbance, one of my grandfather’s executors, who was
present, assured Mr. Bowling, that his nephew should have all manner of
justice; that a day should be appointed after the funeral for examining
the papers of the deceased, in presence of all his relations; till
which time every desk and cabinet in the house should remain close
sealed; and that he was very welcome to be witness to this ceremony,
which was immediately performed to his satisfaction. In the meantime,
orders were given to provide mourning for all the relations, in which
number I was included; but my uncle would not suffer me to accept of
it, until I should be assured whether or no I had reason to honour his
memory so far. During this interval, the conjectures of people, with
regard to the old gentleman’s will, were various: as it was well known,
he had, besides his landed estate, which was worth £700 per annum, six
or seven thousand pounds at interest, some imagined that the whole real
estate (which he had greatly improved) would go to the young man whom
he always entertained as his heir; and that the money would be equally
divided between my female cousins (five in number) and me. Others were
of opinion, that, as the rest of the children had been already provided
for, he would only bequeath two or three hundred pounds to each of his
granddaughters, and leave the bulk of the sum to me, to atone for his
unnatural usage of my father. At length the important hour arrived, and
the will was produced in the midst of the expectants, whose looks and
gestures formed a group that would have been very entertaining to an
unconcerned spectator. But, the reader can scarce conceive the
astonishment and mortification that appeared, when an attorney
pronounced aloud, the young squire sole heir of all his grandfather’s
estate, personal and real. My uncle, who had listened with great
attention, sucking the head of his cudgel all the while, accompanied
these words of the attorney with a stare, and whew, that alarmed the
whole assembly. The eldest and pertest of my female competitors, who
had been always very officious about my grandfather’s person, inquired,
with a faltering accent and visage as yellow as an orange, “if there
were no legacies?” and was answered, “None at all.” Upon which she
fainted away. The rest, whose expectations, perhaps, were not so
sanguine, supported their disappointment with more resolution, though
not without giving evident marks of indignation, and grief at least as
genuine as that which appeared in them at the old gentleman’s death. My
conductor, after having kicked with his heel for some time against the
wainscot, began: “So there’s no legacy, friend, ha!—here’s an old
succubus; but somebody’s soul howls for it, d—n me!” The parson of the
parish, who was one of the executors, and had acted as ghostly director
to the old man, no sooner heard this exclamation than he cried out,
“Avaunt, unchristian reviler! avaunt! wilt thou not allow the soul of
his honour to rest in peace?” But this zealous pastor did not find
himself so warmly seconded, as formerly, by the young ladies, who now
joined my uncle against him, and accused him of having acted the part
of a busybody with their grandpapa whose ears he had certainly abused
by false stories to their prejudice, or else he would not have
neglected them in such an unnatural manner. The young squire was much
diverted with this scene, and whispered to my uncle, that if he had not
murdered his dogs, he would have shown him glorious fun, by hunting a
black badger (so he termed the clergyman). The surly lieutenant, who
was not in a humour to relish this amusement, replied, “You and your
dogs may be damn’d. I suppose you’ll find them with your old dad, in
the latitude of hell. Come, Rory,—about ship, my lad, we must steer
another course, I think.” And away we went.




CHAPTER V


The Schoolmaster uses me barbarously—I form a Project of Revenge, in
which I am assisted by my Uncle—I leave the Village—am settled at a
University by his Generosity


On our way back to the village, my uncle spoke not a word during the
space of a whole hour, but whistled with great vehemence the tune of
“Why should we quarrel for riches,” etc. his visage being contracted
all the while into a most formidable frown. At length his pace
increased to such a degree that I was left behind a considerable way:
then he waited for me; and when I was almost up with him, called out in
a surly tone, “Bear a hand, damme! must I bring to every minute for
you, you lazy dog.” Then, laying hold of me by the arm, hauled me
along, until his good nature (of which he had a great share) and
reflection getting the better of his he said, “Come, my boy, don’t be
cast down,—the old rascal is in hell, that’s some satisfaction; you
shall go to sea with me, my lad. A light heart and a thin pair of
breeches goes through the world, brave boys, as the song goes—eh!”
Though this proposal did not at all suit my inclination, I was afraid
of discovering my aversion to it, lest I should disoblige the only
friend I had in the world; and he was so much a seaman that he never
dreamt I could have had any objection to his design; consequently gave
himself no trouble in consulting my approbation. But this resolution
was soon dropped, by the device of our usher, who assured Mr. Bowling,
it would be a thousand pities to balk my genius, which would certainly
one day make my fortune on shore, provided it received due cultivation.
Upon which, this generous tar determined (though he could ill afford
it) to give me university education; and accordingly settled my board
and other expenses, at a town not many miles distant, famous for its
colleges, whither we repaired in a short time. But, before the day of
our departure, the schoolmaster, who no longer had the fear of my
grandfather before his eyes, laid aside all decency and restraint, and
not only abused me in the grossest language his rancour could suggest,
as a wicked, profligate, dull, beggarly miscreant, whom he had taught
out of charity; but also inveighed in the most bitter manner against
the memory of the judge (who by the by had procured that settlement for
him), hinting, in pretty plain terms, that the old gentleman’s soul was
damned to all eternity for his injustice in neglecting to pay for my
learning.

This brutal behaviour, added to the sufferings I had formerly undergone
made me think it high time to be revenged on this insolent pedagogue.
Having consulted my adherents, I found them all staunch in their
promises to stand by me; and our scheme was this:—In the afternoon
preceding to the day of our departure for the University, I resolved to
take the advantage of the usher’s going out to make water (which he
regularly did at four o’clock), and shut the great door, that he might
not come to the assistance of his superior. This being done, the
assault was to be begun by my advancing to my master and spitting in
his face. I was to be seconded by two of the strongest boys in the
school, who were devoted to me; their business was to join me in
dragging the tyrant to a bench, over which he was to be laid, and his
bare posteriors heartily flogged, with his own birch, which we proposed
to wrest from him in his struggle; but if we should find him too many
for us all three, we were to demand the assistance of our competitors,
who should be ready to enforce us, or oppose anything that might be
undertaken for the master’s relief. One of my principal assistants was
called Jeremy Gawky, son and heir of a wealthy gentleman in the
neighbourhood; and the name of the other, Hugh Strap, the cadet of a
family which had given shoemakers to the village time out of mind. I
had once saved Gawky’s life, by plunging into a river an