*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LAST MAN ***




The Last Man

by Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley

LONDON:
HENRY COLBURN.
1826.


Contents

 VOL. I.
 INTRODUCTION.
 CHAPTER I.
 CHAPTER II.
 CHAPTER III.
 CHAPTER IV.
 CHAPTER IV.
 CHAPTER V.
 CHAPTER VI.
 CHAPTER VII.
 CHAPTER VIII.
 CHAPTER IX.
 CHAPTER X.

 VOL. II.
 CHAPTER I.
 CHAPTER II.
 CHAPTER III.
 CHAPTER IV.
 CHAPTER V.
 CHAPTER VI.
 CHAPTER VII.
 CHAPTER VIII.
 CHAPTER IX.

 VOL. III.
 CHAPTER I.
 CHAPTER II.
 CHAPTER III.
 CHAPTER IV.
 CHAPTER V.
 CHAPTER VI.
 CHAPTER VII.
 CHAPTER VIII.
 CHAPTER IX.
 CHAPTER X.




VOL. I.




INTRODUCTION.


I visited Naples in the year 1818. On the 8th of December of that year,
my companion and I crossed the Bay, to visit the antiquities which are
scattered on the shores of Baiæ. The translucent and shining waters of
the calm sea covered fragments of old Roman villas, which were
interlaced by sea-weed, and received diamond tints from the chequering
of the sun-beams; the blue and pellucid element was such as Galatea
might have skimmed in her car of mother of pearl; or Cleopatra, more
fitly than the Nile, have chosen as the path of her magic ship. Though
it was winter, the atmosphere seemed more appropriate to early spring;
and its genial warmth contributed to inspire those sensations of placid
delight, which are the portion of every traveller, as he lingers, loath
to quit the tranquil bays and radiant promontories of Baiæ.

We visited the so called Elysian Fields and Avernus; and wandered
through various ruined temples, baths, and classic spots; at length we
entered the gloomy cavern of the Cumæan Sibyl. Our Lazzeroni bore
flaring torches, which shone red, and almost dusky, in the murky
subterranean passages, whose darkness thirstily surrounding them,
seemed eager to imbibe more and more of the element of light. We passed
by a natural archway, leading to a second gallery, and enquired, if we
could not enter there also. The guides pointed to the reflection of
their torches on the water that paved it, leaving us to form our own
conclusion; but adding it was a pity, for it led to the Sibyl’s Cave.
Our curiosity and enthusiasm were excited by this circumstance, and we
insisted upon attempting the passage. As is usually the case in the
prosecution of such enterprizes, the difficulties decreased on
examination. We found, on each side of the humid pathway, “dry land for
the sole of the foot.” At length we arrived at a large, desert, dark
cavern, which the Lazzeroni assured us was the Sibyl’s Cave. We were
sufficiently disappointed—Yet we examined it with care, as if its
blank, rocky walls could still bear trace of celestial visitant. On one
side was a small opening. Whither does this lead? we asked: can we
enter here?—“_Questo poi, no,_”—said the wild looking savage, who held
the torch; “you can advance but a short distance, and nobody visits
it.”

“Nevertheless, I will try it,” said my companion; “it may lead to the
real cavern. Shall I go alone, or will you accompany me?”

I signified my readiness to proceed, but our guides protested against
such a measure. With great volubility, in their native Neapolitan
dialect, with which we were not very familiar, they told us that there
were spectres, that the roof would fall in, that it was too narrow to
admit us, that there was a deep hole within, filled with water, and we
might be drowned. My friend shortened the harangue, by taking the man’s
torch from him; and we proceeded alone.

The passage, which at first scarcely admitted us, quickly grew narrower
and lower; we were almost bent double; yet still we persisted in making
our way through it. At length we entered a wider space, and the low
roof heightened; but, as we congratulated ourselves on this change, our
torch was extinguished by a current of air, and we were left in utter
darkness. The guides bring with them materials for renewing the light,
but we had none—our only resource was to return as we came. We groped
round the widened space to find the entrance, and after a time fancied
that we had succeeded. This proved however to be a second passage,
which evidently ascended. It terminated like the former; though
something approaching to a ray, we could not tell whence, shed a very
doubtful twilight in the space. By degrees, our eyes grew somewhat
accustomed to this dimness, and we perceived that there was no direct
passage leading us further; but that it was possible to climb one side
of the cavern to a low arch at top, which promised a more easy path,
from whence we now discovered that this light proceeded. With
considerable difficulty we scrambled up, and came to another passage
with still more of illumination, and this led to another ascent like
the former.

After a succession of these, which our resolution alone permitted us to
surmount, we arrived at a wide cavern with an arched dome-like roof. An
aperture in the midst let in the light of heaven; but this was
overgrown with brambles and underwood, which acted as a veil, obscuring
the day, and giving a solemn religious hue to the apartment. It was
spacious, and nearly circular, with a raised seat of stone, about the
size of a Grecian couch, at one end. The only sign that life had been
here, was the perfect snow-white skeleton of a goat, which had probably
not perceived the opening as it grazed on the hill above, and had
fallen headlong. Ages perhaps had elapsed since this catastrophe; and
the ruin it had made above, had been repaired by the growth of
vegetation during many hundred summers.

The rest of the furniture of the cavern consisted of piles of leaves,
fragments of bark, and a white filmy substance, resembling the inner
part of the green hood which shelters the grain of the unripe Indian
corn. We were fatigued by our struggles to attain this point, and
seated ourselves on the rocky couch, while the sounds of tinkling
sheep-bells, and shout of shepherd-boy, reached us from above.

At length my friend, who had taken up some of the leaves strewed about,
exclaimed, “This _is_ the Sibyl’s cave; these are Sibylline leaves.” On
examination, we found that all the leaves, bark, and other substances,
were traced with written characters. What appeared to us more
astonishing, was that these writings were expressed in various
languages: some unknown to my companion, ancient Chaldee, and Egyptian
hieroglyphics, old as the Pyramids. Stranger still, some were in modern
dialects, English and Italian. We could make out little by the dim
light, but they seemed to contain prophecies, detailed relations of
events but lately passed; names, now well known, but of modern date;
and often exclamations of exultation or woe, of victory or defeat, were
traced on their thin scant pages. This was certainly the Sibyl’s Cave;
not indeed exactly as Virgil describes it; but the whole of this land
had been so convulsed by earthquake and volcano, that the change was
not wonderful, though the traces of ruin were effaced by time; and we
probably owed the preservation of these leaves, to the accident which
had closed the mouth of the cavern, and the swift-growing vegetation
which had rendered its sole opening impervious to the storm. We made a
hasty selection of such of the leaves, whose writing one at least of us
could understand; and then, laden with our treasure, we bade adieu to
the dim hypæthric cavern, and after much difficulty succeeded in
rejoining our guides.

During our stay at Naples, we often returned to this cave, sometimes
alone, skimming the sun-lit sea, and each time added to our store.
Since that period, whenever the world’s circumstance has not
imperiously called me away, or the temper of my mind impeded such
study, I have been employed in deciphering these sacred remains. Their
meaning, wondrous and eloquent, has often repaid my toil, soothing me
in sorrow, and exciting my imagination to daring flights, through the
immensity of nature and the mind of man. For awhile my labours were not
solitary; but that time is gone; and, with the selected and matchless
companion of my toils, their dearest reward is also lost to me—

Di mie tenere frondi altro lavoro
Credea mostrarte; e qual fero pianeta
Ne’ nvidiò insieme, o mio nobil tesoro?


I present the public with my latest discoveries in the slight Sibylline
pages. Scattered and unconnected as they were, I have been obliged to
add links, and model the work into a consistent form. But the main
substance rests on the truths contained in these poetic rhapsodies, and
the divine intuition which the Cumæan damsel obtained from heaven.

I have often wondered at the subject of her verses, and at the English
dress of the Latin poet. Sometimes I have thought, that, obscure and
chaotic as they are, they owe their present form to me, their
decipherer. As if we should give to another artist, the painted
fragments which form the mosaic copy of Raphael’s Transfiguration in
St. Peter’s; he would put them together in a form, whose mode would be
fashioned by his own peculiar mind and talent. Doubtless the leaves of
the Cumæan Sibyl have suffered distortion and diminution of interest
and excellence in my hands. My only excuse for thus transforming them,
is that they were unintelligible in their pristine condition.

My labours have cheered long hours of solitude, and taken me out of a
world, which has averted its once benignant face from me, to one
glowing with imagination and power. Will my readers ask how I could
find solace from the narration of misery and woeful change? This is one
of the mysteries of our nature, which holds full sway over me, and from
whose influence I cannot escape. I confess, that I have not been
unmoved by the development of the tale; and that I have been depressed,
nay, agonized, at some parts of the recital, which I have faithfully
transcribed from my materials. Yet such is human nature, that the
excitement of mind was dear to me, and that the imagination, painter of
tempest and earthquake, or, worse, the stormy and ruin-fraught passions
of man, softened my real sorrows and endless regrets, by clothing these
fictitious ones in that ideality, which takes the mortal sting from
pain.

I hardly know whether this apology is necessary. For the merits of my
adaptation and translation must decide how far I have well bestowed my
time and imperfect powers, in giving form and substance to the frail
and attenuated Leaves of the Sibyl.




CHAPTER I.


I am the native of a sea-surrounded nook, a cloud-enshadowed land,
which, when the surface of the globe, with its shoreless ocean and
trackless continents, presents itself to my mind, appears only as an
inconsiderable speck in the immense whole; and yet, when balanced in
the scale of mental power, far outweighed countries of larger extent
and more numerous population. So true it is, that man’s mind alone was
the creator of all that was good or great to man, and that Nature
herself was only his first minister. England, seated far north in the
turbid sea, now visits my dreams in the semblance of a vast and
well-manned ship, which mastered the winds and rode proudly over the
waves. In my boyish days she was the universe to me. When I stood on my
native hills, and saw plain and mountain stretch out to the utmost
limits of my vision, speckled by the dwellings of my countrymen, and
subdued to fertility by their labours, the earth’s very centre was
fixed for me in that spot, and the rest of her orb was as a fable, to
have forgotten which would have cost neither my imagination nor
understanding an effort.

My fortunes have been, from the beginning, an exemplification of the
power that mutability may possess over the varied tenor of man’s life.
With regard to myself, this came almost by inheritance. My father was
one of those men on whom nature had bestowed to prodigality the envied
gifts of wit and imagination, and then left his bark of life to be
impelled by these winds, without adding reason as the rudder, or
judgment as the pilot for the voyage. His extraction was obscure; but
circumstances brought him early into public notice, and his small
paternal property was soon dissipated in the splendid scene of fashion
and luxury in which he was an actor. During the short years of
thoughtless youth, he was adored by the high-bred triflers of the day,
nor least by the youthful sovereign, who escaped from the intrigues of
party, and the arduous duties of kingly business, to find never-failing
amusement and exhilaration of spirit in his society. My father’s
impulses, never under his own controul, perpetually led him into
difficulties from which his ingenuity alone could extricate him; and
the accumulating pile of debts of honour and of trade, which would have
bent to earth any other, was supported by him with a light spirit and
tameless hilarity; while his company was so necessary at the tables and
assemblies of the rich, that his derelictions were considered venial,
and he himself received with intoxicating flattery.

This kind of popularity, like every other, is evanescent: and the
difficulties of every kind with which he had to contend, increased in a
frightful ratio compared with his small means of extricating himself.
At such times the king, in his enthusiasm for him, would come to his
relief, and then kindly take his friend to task; my father gave the
best promises for amendment, but his social disposition, his craving
for the usual diet of admiration, and more than all, the fiend of
gambling, which fully possessed him, made his good resolutions
transient, his promises vain. With the quick sensibility peculiar to
his temperament, he perceived his power in the brilliant circle to be
on the wane. The king married; and the haughty princess of Austria, who
became, as queen of England, the head of fashion, looked with harsh
eyes on his defects, and with contempt on the affection her royal
husband entertained for him. My father felt that his fall was near; but
so far from profiting by this last calm before the storm to save
himself, he sought to forget anticipated evil by making still greater
sacrifices to the deity of pleasure, deceitful and cruel arbiter of his
destiny.

The king, who was a man of excellent dispositions, but easily led, had
now become a willing disciple of his imperious consort. He was induced
to look with extreme disapprobation, and at last with distaste, on my
father’s imprudence and follies. It is true that his presence
dissipated these clouds; his warm-hearted frankness, brilliant sallies,
and confiding demeanour were irresistible: it was only when at a
distance, while still renewed tales of his errors were poured into his
royal friend’s ear, that he lost his influence. The queen’s dextrous
management was employed to prolong these absences, and gather together
accusations. At length the king was brought to see in him a source of
perpetual disquiet, knowing that he should pay for the short-lived
pleasure of his society by tedious homilies, and more painful
narrations of excesses, the truth of which he could not disprove. The
result was, that he would make one more attempt to reclaim him, and in
case of ill success, cast him off for ever.

Such a scene must have been one of deepest interest and high-wrought
passion. A powerful king, conspicuous for a goodness which had
heretofore made him meek, and now lofty in his admonitions, with
alternate entreaty and reproof, besought his friend to attend to his
real interests, resolutely to avoid those fascinations which in fact
were fast deserting him, and to spend his great powers on a worthy
field, in which he, his sovereign, would be his prop, his stay, and his
pioneer. My father felt this kindness; for a moment ambitious dreams
floated before him; and he thought that it would be well to exchange
his present pursuits for nobler duties. With sincerity and fervour he
gave the required promise: as a pledge of continued favour, he received
from his royal master a sum of money to defray pressing debts, and
enable him to enter under good auspices his new career. That very
night, while yet full of gratitude and good resolves, this whole sum,
and its amount doubled, was lost at the gaming-table. In his desire to
repair his first losses, my father risked double stakes, and thus
incurred a debt of honour he was wholly unable to pay. Ashamed to apply
again to the king, he turned his back upon London, its false delights
and clinging miseries; and, with poverty for his sole companion, buried
himself in solitude among the hills and lakes of Cumberland. His wit,
his bon mots, the record of his personal attractions, fascinating
manners, and social talents, were long remembered and repeated from
mouth to mouth. Ask where now was this favourite of fashion, this
companion of the noble, this excelling beam, which gilt with alien
splendour the assemblies of the courtly and the gay—you heard that he
was under a cloud, a lost man; not one thought it belonged to him to
repay pleasure by real services, or that his long reign of brilliant
wit deserved a pension on retiring. The king lamented his absence; he
loved to repeat his sayings, relate the adventures they had had
together, and exalt his talents—but here ended his reminiscence.

Meanwhile my father, forgotten, could not forget. He repined for the
loss of what was more necessary to him than air or food—the excitements
of pleasure, the admiration of the noble, the luxurious and polished
living of the great. A nervous fever was the consequence; during which
he was nursed by the daughter of a poor cottager, under whose roof he
lodged. She was lovely, gentle, and, above all, kind to him; nor can it
afford astonishment, that the late idol of high-bred beauty should,
even in a fallen state, appear a being of an elevated and wondrous
nature to the lowly cottage-girl. The attachment between them led to
the ill-fated marriage, of which I was the offspring. Notwithstanding
the tenderness and sweetness of my mother, her husband still deplored
his degraded state. Unaccustomed to industry, he knew not in what way
to contribute to the support of his increasing family. Sometimes he
thought of applying to the king; pride and shame for a while withheld
him; and, before his necessities became so imperious as to compel him
to some kind of exertion, he died. For one brief interval before this
catastrophe, he looked forward to the future, and contemplated with
anguish the desolate situation in which his wife and children would be
left. His last effort was a letter to the king, full of touching
eloquence, and of occasional flashes of that brilliant spirit which was
an integral part of him. He bequeathed his widow and orphans to the
friendship of his royal master, and felt satisfied that, by this means,
their prosperity was better assured in his death than in his life. This
letter was enclosed to the care of a nobleman, who, he did not doubt,
would perform the last and inexpensive office of placing it in the
king’s own hand.

He died in debt, and his little property was seized immediately by his
creditors. My mother, pennyless and burthened with two children, waited
week after week, and month after month, in sickening expectation of a
reply, which never came. She had no experience beyond her father’s
cottage; and the mansion of the lord of the manor was the chiefest type
of grandeur she could conceive. During my father’s life, she had been
made familiar with the name of royalty and the courtly circle; but such
things, ill according with her personal experience, appeared, after the
loss of him who gave substance and reality to them, vague and
fantastical. If, under any circumstances, she could have acquired
sufficient courage to address the noble persons mentioned by her
husband, the ill success of his own application caused her to banish
the idea. She saw therefore no escape from dire penury: perpetual care,
joined to sorrow for the loss of the wondrous being, whom she continued
to contemplate with ardent admiration, hard labour, and naturally
delicate health, at length released her from the sad continuity of want
and misery.

The condition of her orphan children was peculiarly desolate. Her own
father had been an emigrant from another part of the country, and had
died long since: they had no one relation to take them by the hand;
they were outcasts, paupers, unfriended beings, to whom the most scanty
pittance was a matter of favour, and who were treated merely as
children of peasants, yet poorer than the poorest, who, dying, had left
them, a thankless bequest, to the close-handed charity of the land.

I, the elder of the two, was five years old when my mother died. A
remembrance of the discourses of my parents, and the communications
which my mother endeavoured to impress upon me concerning my father’s
friends, in slight hope that I might one day derive benefit from the
knowledge, floated like an indistinct dream through my brain. I
conceived that I was different and superior to my protectors and
companions, but I knew not how or wherefore. The sense of injury,
associated with the name of king and noble, clung to me; but I could
draw no conclusions from such feelings, to serve as a guide to action.
My first real knowledge of myself was as an unprotected orphan among
the valleys and fells of Cumberland. I was in the service of a farmer;
and with crook in hand, my dog at my side, I shepherded a numerous
flock on the near uplands. I cannot say much in praise of such a life;
and its pains far exceeded its pleasures. There was freedom in it, a
companionship with nature, and a reckless loneliness; but these,
romantic as they were, did not accord with the love of action and
desire of human sympathy, characteristic of youth. Neither the care of
my flock, nor the change of seasons, were sufficient to tame my eager
spirit; my out-door life and unemployed time were the temptations that
led me early into lawless habits. I associated with others friendless
like myself; I formed them into a band, I was their chief and captain.
All shepherd-boys alike, while our flocks were spread over the
pastures, we schemed and executed many a mischievous prank, which drew
on us the anger and revenge of the rustics. I was the leader and
protector of my comrades, and as I became distinguished among them,
their misdeeds were usually visited upon me. But while I endured
punishment and pain in their defence with the spirit of an hero, I
claimed as my reward their praise and obedience.

In such a school my disposition became rugged, but firm. The appetite
for admiration and small capacity for self-controul which I inherited
from my father, nursed by adversity, made me daring and reckless. I was
rough as the elements, and unlearned as the animals I tended. I often
compared myself to them, and finding that my chief superiority
consisted in power, I soon persuaded myself that it was in power only
that I was inferior to the chiefest potentates of the earth. Thus
untaught in refined philosophy, and pursued by a restless feeling of
degradation from my true station in society, I wandered among the hills
of civilized England as uncouth a savage as the wolf-bred founder of
old Rome. I owned but one law, it was that of the strongest, and my
greatest deed of virtue was never to submit.

Yet let me a little retract from this sentence I have passed on myself.
My mother, when dying, had, in addition to her other half-forgotten and
misapplied lessons, committed, with solemn exhortation, her other child
to my fraternal guardianship; and this one duty I performed to the best
of my ability, with all the zeal and affection of which my nature was
capable. My sister was three years younger than myself; I had nursed
her as an infant, and when the difference of our sexes, by giving us
various occupations, in a great measure divided us, yet she continued
to be the object of my careful love. Orphans, in the fullest sense of
the term, we were poorest among the poor, and despised among the
unhonoured. If my daring and courage obtained for me a kind of
respectful aversion, her youth and sex, since they did not excite
tenderness, by proving her to be weak, were the causes of numberless
mortifications to her; and her own disposition was not so constituted
as to diminish the evil effects of her lowly station.

She was a singular being, and, like me, inherited much of the peculiar
disposition of our father. Her countenance was all expression; her eyes
were not dark, but impenetrably deep; you seemed to discover space
after space in their intellectual glance, and to feel that the soul
which was their soul, comprehended an universe of thought in its ken.
She was pale and fair, and her golden hair clustered on her temples,
contrasting its rich hue with the living marble beneath. Her coarse
peasant-dress, little consonant apparently with the refinement of
feeling which her face expressed, yet in a strange manner accorded with
it. She was like one of Guido’s saints, with heaven in her heart and in
her look, so that when you saw her you only thought of that within, and
costume and even feature were secondary to the mind that beamed in her
countenance.

Yet though lovely and full of noble feeling, my poor Perdita (for this
was the fanciful name my sister had received from her dying parent),
was not altogether saintly in her disposition. Her manners were cold
and repulsive. If she had been nurtured by those who had regarded her
with affection, she might have been different; but unloved and
neglected, she repaid want of kindness with distrust and silence. She
was submissive to those who held authority over her, but a perpetual
cloud dwelt on her brow; she looked as if she expected enmity from
every one who approached her, and her actions were instigated by the
same feeling. All the time she could command she spent in solitude. She
would ramble to the most unfrequented places, and scale dangerous
heights, that in those unvisited spots she might wrap herself in
loneliness. Often she passed whole hours walking up and down the paths
of the woods; she wove garlands of flowers and ivy, or watched the
flickering of the shadows and glancing of the leaves; sometimes she sat
beside a stream, and as her thoughts paused, threw flowers or pebbles
into the waters, watching how those swam and these sank; or she would
set afloat boats formed of bark of trees or leaves, with a feather for
a sail, and intensely watch the navigation of her craft among the
rapids and shallows of the brook. Meanwhile her active fancy wove a
thousand combinations; she dreamt “of moving accidents by flood and
field”—she lost herself delightedly in these self-created wanderings,
and returned with unwilling spirit to the dull detail of common life.
Poverty was the cloud that veiled her excellencies, and all that was
good in her seemed about to perish from want of the genial dew of
affection. She had not even the same advantage as I in the recollection
of her parents; she clung to me, her brother, as her only friend, but
her alliance with me completed the distaste that her protectors felt
for her; and every error was magnified by them into crimes. If she had
been bred in that sphere of life to which by inheritance the delicate
framework of her mind and person was adapted, she would have been the
object almost of adoration, for her virtues were as eminent as her
defects. All the genius that ennobled the blood of her father
illustrated hers; a generous tide flowed in her veins; artifice, envy,
or meanness, were at the antipodes of her nature; her countenance, when
enlightened by amiable feeling, might have belonged to a queen of
nations; her eyes were bright; her look fearless.

Although by our situation and dispositions we were almost equally cut
off from the usual forms of social intercourse, we formed a strong
contrast to each other. I always required the stimulants of
companionship and applause. Perdita was all-sufficient to herself.
Notwithstanding my lawless habits, my disposition was sociable, hers
recluse. My life was spent among tangible realities, hers was a dream.
I might be said even to love my enemies, since by exciting me they in a
sort bestowed happiness upon me; Perdita almost disliked her friends,
for they interfered with her visionary moods. All my feelings, even of
exultation and triumph, were changed to bitterness, if unparticipated;
Perdita, even in joy, fled to loneliness, and could go on from day to
day, neither expressing her emotions, nor seeking a fellow-feeling in
another mind. Nay, she could love and dwell with tenderness on the look
and voice of her friend, while her demeanour expressed the coldest
reserve. A sensation with her became a sentiment, and she never spoke
until she had mingled her perceptions of outward objects with others
which were the native growth of her own mind. She was like a fruitful
soil that imbibed the airs and dews of heaven, and gave them forth
again to light in loveliest forms of fruits and flowers; but then she
was often dark and rugged as that soil, raked up, and new sown with
unseen seed.

She dwelt in a cottage whose trim grass-plat sloped down to the waters
of the lake of Ulswater; a beech wood stretched up the hill behind, and
a purling brook gently falling from the acclivity ran through
poplar-shaded banks into the lake. I lived with a farmer whose house
was built higher up among the hills: a dark crag rose behind it, and,
exposed to the north, the snow lay in its crevices the summer through.
Before dawn I led my flock to the sheep-walks, and guarded them through
the day. It was a life of toil; for rain and cold were more frequent
than sunshine; but it was my pride to contemn the elements. My trusty
dog watched the sheep as I slipped away to the rendezvous of my
comrades, and thence to the accomplishment of our schemes. At noon we
met again, and we threw away in contempt our peasant fare, as we built
our fire-place and kindled the cheering blaze destined to cook the game
stolen from the neighbouring preserves. Then came the tale of
hair-breadth escapes, combats with dogs, ambush and flight, as
gipsey-like we encompassed our pot. The search after a stray lamb, or
the devices by which we elude or endeavoured to elude punishment,
filled up the hours of afternoon; in the evening my flock went to its
fold, and I to my sister.

It was seldom indeed that we escaped, to use an old-fashioned phrase,
scot free. Our dainty fare was often exchanged for blows and
imprisonment. Once, when thirteen years of age, I was sent for a month
to the county jail. I came out, my morals unimproved, my hatred to my
oppressors encreased tenfold. Bread and water did not tame my blood,
nor solitary confinement inspire me with gentle thoughts. I was angry,
impatient, miserable; my only happy hours were those during which I
devised schemes of revenge; these were perfected in my forced solitude,
so that during the whole of the following season, and I was freed early
in September, I never failed to provide excellent and plenteous fare
for myself and my comrades. This was a glorious winter. The sharp frost
and heavy snows tamed the animals, and kept the country gentlemen by
their firesides; we got more game than we could eat, and my faithful
dog grew sleek upon our refuse.

Thus years passed on; and years only added fresh love of freedom, and
contempt for all that was not as wild and rude as myself. At the age of
sixteen I had shot up in appearance to man’s estate; I was tall and
athletic; I was practised to feats of strength, and inured to the
inclemency of the elements. My skin was embrowned by the sun; my step
was firm with conscious power. I feared no man, and loved none. In
after life I looked back with wonder to what I then was; how utterly
worthless I should have become if I had pursued my lawless career. My
life was like that of an animal, and my mind was in danger of
degenerating into that which informs brute nature. Until now, my savage
habits had done me no radical mischief; my physical powers had grown up
and flourished under their influence, and my mind, undergoing the same
discipline, was imbued with all the hardy virtues. But now my boasted
independence was daily instigating me to acts of tyranny, and freedom
was becoming licentiousness. I stood on the brink of manhood; passions,
strong as the trees of a forest, had already taken root within me, and
were about to shadow with their noxious overgrowth, my path of life.

I panted for enterprises beyond my childish exploits, and formed
distempered dreams of future action. I avoided my ancient comrades, and
I soon lost them. They arrived at the age when they were sent to fulfil
their destined situations in life; while I, an outcast, with none to
lead or drive me forward, paused. The old began to point at me as an
example, the young to wonder at me as a being distinct from themselves;
I hated them, and began, last and worst degradation, to hate myself. I
clung to my ferocious habits, yet half despised them; I continued my
war against civilization, and yet entertained a wish to belong to it.

I revolved again and again all that I remembered my mother to have told
me of my father’s former life; I contemplated the few relics I
possessed belonging to him, which spoke of greater refinement than
could be found among the mountain cottages; but nothing in all this
served as a guide to lead me to another and pleasanter way of life. My
father had been connected with nobles, but all I knew of such
connection was subsequent neglect. The name of the king,—he to whom my
dying father had addressed his latest prayers, and who had barbarously
slighted them, was associated only with the ideas of unkindness,
injustice, and consequent resentment. I was born for something greater
than I was—and greater I would become; but greatness, at least to my
distorted perceptions, was no necessary associate of goodness, and my
wild thoughts were unchecked by moral considerations when they rioted
in dreams of distinction. Thus I stood upon a pinnacle, a sea of evil
rolled at my feet; I was about to precipitate myself into it, and rush
like a torrent over all obstructions to the object of my wishes— when a
stranger influence came over the current of my fortunes, and changed
their boisterous course to what was in comparison like the gentle
meanderings of a meadow-encircling streamlet.




CHAPTER II.


I lived far from the busy haunts of men, and the rumour of wars or
political changes came worn to a mere sound, to our mountain abodes.
England had been the scene of momentous struggles, during my early
boyhood. In the year 2073, the last of its kings, the ancient friend of
my father, had abdicated in compliance with the gentle force of the
remonstrances of his subjects, and a republic was instituted. Large
estates were secured to the dethroned monarch and his family; he
received the title of Earl of Windsor, and Windsor Castle, an ancient
royalty, with its wide demesnes were a part of his allotted wealth. He
died soon after, leaving two children, a son and a daughter.

The ex-queen, a princess of the house of Austria, had long impelled her
husband to withstand the necessity of the times. She was haughty and
fearless; she cherished a love of power, and a bitter contempt for him
who had despoiled himself of a kingdom. For her children’s sake alone
she consented to remain, shorn of regality, a member of the English
republic. When she became a widow, she turned all her thoughts to the
educating her son Adrian, second Earl of Windsor, so as to accomplish
her ambitious ends; and with his mother’s milk he imbibed, and was
intended to grow up in the steady purpose of re-acquiring his lost
crown. Adrian was now fifteen years of age. He was addicted to study,
and imbued beyond his years with learning and talent: report said that
he had already begun to thwart his mother’s views, and to entertain
republican principles. However this might be, the haughty Countess
entrusted none with the secrets of her family-tuition. Adrian was bred
up in solitude, and kept apart from the natural companions of his age
and rank. Some unknown circumstance now induced his mother to send him
from under her immediate tutelage; and we heard that he was about to
visit Cumberland. A thousand tales were rife, explanatory of the
Countess of Windsor’s conduct; none true probably; but each day it
became more certain that we should have the noble scion of the late
regal house of England among us.

There was a large estate with a mansion attached to it, belonging to
this family, at Ulswater. A large park was one of its appendages, laid
out with great taste, and plentifully stocked with game. I had often
made depredations on these preserves; and the neglected state of the
property facilitated my incursions. When it was decided that the young
Earl of Windsor should visit Cumberland, workmen arrived to put the
house and grounds in order for his reception. The apartments were
restored to their pristine splendour, and the park, all disrepairs
restored, was guarded with unusual care.

I was beyond measure disturbed by this intelligence. It roused all my
dormant recollections, my suspended sentiments of injury, and gave rise
to the new one of revenge. I could no longer attend to my occupations;
all my plans and devices were forgotten; I seemed about to begin life
anew, and that under no good auspices. The tug of war, I thought, was
now to begin. He would come triumphantly to the district to which my
parent had fled broken-hearted; he would find the ill-fated offspring,
bequeathed with such vain confidence to his royal father, miserable
paupers. That he should know of our existence, and treat us, near at
hand, with the same contumely which his father had practised in
distance and absence, appeared to me the certain consequence of all
that had gone before. Thus then I should meet this titled stripling—the
son of my father’s friend. He would be hedged in by servants; nobles,
and the sons of nobles, were his companions; all England rang with his
name; and his coming, like a thunderstorm, was heard from far: while I,
unlettered and unfashioned, should, if I came in contact with him, in
the judgment of his courtly followers, bear evidence in my very person
to the propriety of that ingratitude which had made me the degraded
being I appeared.

With my mind fully occupied by these ideas, I might be said as if
fascinated, to haunt the destined abode of the young Earl. I watched
the progress of the improvements, and stood by the unlading waggons, as
various articles of luxury, brought from London, were taken forth and
conveyed into the mansion. It was part of the Ex-Queen’s plan, to
surround her son with princely magnificence. I beheld rich carpets and
silken hangings, ornaments of gold, richly embossed metals, emblazoned
furniture, and all the appendages of high rank arranged, so that
nothing but what was regal in splendour should reach the eye of one of
royal descent. I looked on these; I turned my gaze to my own mean
dress.—Whence sprung this difference? Whence but from ingratitude, from
falsehood, from a dereliction on the part of the prince’s father, of
all noble sympathy and generous feeling. Doubtless, he also, whose
blood received a mingling tide from his proud mother—he, the
acknowledged focus of the kingdom’s wealth and nobility, had been
taught to repeat my father’s name with disdain, and to scoff at my just
claims to protection. I strove to think that all this grandeur was but
more glaring infamy, and that, by planting his gold-enwoven flag beside
my tarnished and tattered banner, he proclaimed not his superiority,
but his debasement. Yet I envied him. His stud of beautiful horses, his
arms of costly workmanship, the praise that attended him, the
adoration, ready servitor, high place and high esteem,—I considered
them as forcibly wrenched from me, and envied them all with novel and
tormenting bitterness.

To crown my vexation of spirit, Perdita, the visionary Perdita, seemed
to awake to real life with transport, when she told me that the Earl of
Windsor was about to arrive.

“And this pleases you?” I observed, moodily.

“Indeed it does, Lionel,” she replied; “I quite long to see him; he is
the descendant of our kings, the first noble of the land: every one
admires and loves him, and they say that his rank is his least merit;
he is generous, brave, and affable.”

“You have learnt a pretty lesson, Perdita,” said I, “and repeat it so
literally, that you forget the while the proofs we have of the Earl’s
virtues; his generosity to us is manifest in our plenty, his bravery in
the protection he affords us, his affability in the notice he takes of
us. His rank his least merit, do you say? Why, all his virtues are
derived from his station only; because he is rich, he is called
generous; because he is powerful, brave; because he is well served, he
is affable. Let them call him so, let all England believe him to be
thus—we know him—he is our enemy—our penurious, dastardly, arrogant
enemy; if he were gifted with one particle of the virtues you call his,
he would do justly by us, if it were only to shew, that if he must
strike, it should not be a fallen foe. His father injured my father—his
father, unassailable on his throne, dared despise him who only stooped
beneath himself, when he deigned to associate with the royal ingrate.
We, descendants from the one and the other, must be enemies also. He
shall find that I can feel my injuries; he shall learn to dread my
revenge!”

A few days after he arrived. Every inhabitant of the most miserable
cottage, went to swell the stream of population that poured forth to
meet him: even Perdita, in spite of my late philippic, crept near the
highway, to behold this idol of all hearts. I, driven half mad, as I
met party after party of the country people, in their holiday best,
descending the hills, escaped to their cloud-veiled summits, and
looking on the sterile rocks about me, exclaimed—“_They_ do not cry,
long live the Earl!” Nor, when night came, accompanied by drizzling
rain and cold, would I return home; for I knew that each cottage rang
with the praises of Adrian; as I felt my limbs grow numb and chill, my
pain served as food for my insane aversion; nay, I almost triumphed in
it, since it seemed to afford me reason and excuse for my hatred of my
unheeding adversary. All was attributed to him, for I confounded so
entirely the idea of father and son, that I forgot that the latter
might be wholly unconscious of his parent’s neglect of us; and as I
struck my aching head with my hand, I cried: “He shall hear of this! I
will be revenged! I will not suffer like a spaniel! He shall know,
beggar and friendless as I am, that I will not tamely submit to
injury!” Each day, each hour added to these exaggerated wrongs. His
praises were so many adder’s stings infixed in my vulnerable breast. If
I saw him at a distance, riding a beautiful horse, my blood boiled with
rage; the air seemed poisoned by his presence, and my very native
English was changed to a vile jargon, since every phrase I heard was
coupled with his name and honour. I panted to relieve this painful
heart-burning by some misdeed that should rouse him to a sense of my
antipathy. It was the height of his offending, that he should occasion
in me such intolerable sensations, and not deign himself to afford any
demonstration that he was aware that I even lived to feel them.

It soon became known that Adrian took great delight in his park and
preserves. He never sported, but spent hours in watching the tribes of
lovely and almost tame animals with which it was stocked, and ordered
that greater care should be taken of them than ever. Here was an
opening for my plans of offence, and I made use of it with all the
brute impetuosity I derived from my active mode of life. I proposed the
enterprize of poaching on his demesne to my few remaining comrades, who
were the most determined and lawless of the crew; but they all shrunk
from the peril; so I was left to achieve my revenge myself. At first my
exploits were unperceived; I increased in daring; footsteps on the dewy
grass, torn boughs, and marks of slaughter, at length betrayed me to
the game-keepers. They kept better watch; I was taken, and sent to
prison. I entered its gloomy walls in a fit of triumphant extasy: “He
feels me now,” I cried, “and shall, again and again!”—I passed but one
day in confinement; in the evening I was liberated, as I was told, by
the order of the Earl himself. This news precipitated me from my
self-raised pinnacle of honour. He despises me, I thought; but he shall
learn that I despise him, and hold in equal contempt his punishments
and his clemency. On the second night after my release, I was again
taken by the gamekeepers—again imprisoned, and again released; and
again, such was my pertinacity, did the fourth night find me in the
forbidden park. The gamekeepers were more enraged than their lord by my
obstinacy. They had received orders that if I were again taken, I
should be brought to the Earl; and his lenity made them expect a
conclusion which they considered ill befitting my crime. One of them,
who had been from the first the leader among those who had seized me,
resolved to satisfy his own resentment, before he made me over to the
higher powers.

The late setting of the moon, and the extreme caution I was obliged to
use in this my third expedition, consumed so much time, that something
like a qualm of fear came over me when I perceived dark night yield to
twilight. I crept along by the fern, on my hands and knees, seeking the
shadowy coverts of the underwood, while the birds awoke with unwelcome
song above, and the fresh morning wind, playing among the boughs, made
me suspect a footfall at each turn. My heart beat quick as I approached
the palings; my hand was on one of them, a leap would take me to the
other side, when two keepers sprang from an ambush upon me: one knocked
me down, and proceeded to inflict a severe horse-whipping. I started
up—a knife was in my grasp; I made a plunge at his raised right arm,
and inflicted a deep, wide wound in his hand. The rage and yells of the
wounded man, the howling execrations of his comrade, which I answered
with equal bitterness and fury, echoed through the dell; morning broke
more and more, ill accordant in its celestial beauty with our brute and
noisy contest. I and my enemy were still struggling, when the wounded
man exclaimed, “The Earl!” I sprang out of the herculean hold of the
keeper, panting from my exertions; I cast furious glances on my
persecutors, and placing myself with my back to a tree, resolved to
defend myself to the last. My garments were torn, and they, as well as
my hands, were stained with the blood of the man I had wounded; one
hand grasped the dead birds—my hard-earned prey, the other held the
knife; my hair was matted; my face besmeared with the same guilty signs
that bore witness against me on the dripping instrument I clenched; my
whole appearance was haggard and squalid. Tall and muscular as I was in
form, I must have looked like, what indeed I was, the merest ruffian
that ever trod the earth.

The name of the Earl startled me, and caused all the indignant blood
that warmed my heart to rush into my cheeks; I had never seen him
before; I figured to myself a haughty, assuming youth, who would take
me to task, if he deigned to speak to me, with all the arrogance of
superiority. My reply was ready; a reproach I deemed calculated to
sting his very heart. He came up the while; and his appearance blew
aside, with gentle western breath, my cloudy wrath: a tall, slim, fair
boy, with a physiognomy expressive of the excess of sensibility and
refinement stood before me; the morning sunbeams tinged with gold his
silken hair, and spread light and glory over his beaming countenance.
“How is this?” he cried. The men eagerly began their defence; he put
them aside, saying, “Two of you at once on a mere lad— for shame!” He
came up to me: “Verney,” he cried, “Lionel Verney, do we meet thus for
the first time? We were born to be friends to each other; and though
ill fortune has divided us, will you not acknowledge the hereditary
bond of friendship which I trust will hereafter unite us?”

As he spoke, his earnest eyes, fixed on me, seemed to read my very
soul: my heart, my savage revengeful heart, felt the influence of sweet
benignity sink upon it; while his thrilling voice, like sweetest
melody, awoke a mute echo within me, stirring to its depths the
life-blood in my frame. I desired to reply, to acknowledge his
goodness, accept his proffered friendship; but words, fitting words,
were not afforded to the rough mountaineer; I would have held out my
hand, but its guilty stain restrained me. Adrian took pity on my
faltering mien: “Come with me,” he said, “I have much to say to you;
come home with me—you know who I am?”

“Yes,” I exclaimed, “I do believe that I now know you, and that you
will pardon my mistakes—my crime.”

Adrian smiled gently; and after giving his orders to the gamekeepers,
he came up to me; putting his arm in mine, we walk